NP-604: Add MicroShift Service of Loadbalancer Type Support (#1316)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/microshift/loadbalancer-service-support.md

`LoadBalancer` without modification. I don't want to allocate a new IP address
to the Node as the loadbalancer VIP. I want to use the NodeIP as the ingress IP
of the loadbalancer Service. 

### Goals

* Allow users to deploy the load balancer type Service to Microshift.
* The node IP shall be used as the ingress IP of the Service.
* As we will support pluggable CNI in Microshift. The implementation shall be
also compatible with CNIs other than OVN-Kubernetes.

### Non-Goals

* 

## Proposal

To support the loadbalancer type Service, we need to create a new controller
component that watch the Service objects. It shall be responsible for:

1. work with CNIs to plumb the ingress traffic to the endpoint pods.
2. publish the ingress endpoint information in the Service's
   `.status.loadBalancer` field.

### Workflow Description

**cluster user** is a human user responsible for provisioning Services to a
Microshift cluster.

1. The cluster user deploys a Service of type: LoadBalancer 
2. The loadbalancer service controller watches the creation of the service. It
will update the Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field, and help the CNIs to 

> plumbing the ingress traffic to the endpoint pods.

Reviewer: does it help to reach the endpoint pod directly or to the backed clusterIP service?

Author: It depends on which CNI we are talking about. For OVN-K, it doesn't need to do the plumbing work. OVN-K would do that. For other CNIs, if we take the k3s approach. It will create a pod on a node, and the pod will add iptables DNAT rules steering the traffic to the nodePort of the service.

Reviewer 2: How/where does OVN-k do the plumbing?

Reviewer 2: An alternative to what klipper does could be to simply setup DNAT rules on the system from microshift (by first checking the port is free in the system). In this way we avoid cost of additional pods on the system, and we also keep some control over the need to re-install the rules (i.e. firewalld reload)

An advantage to this could be that.. if those rules are compatible with whatever OVNk does under the hood we could serve the purpose of both OVNk and potentially other plugins.

Author: > How/where does OVN-k do the plumbing?

OVN-K watches the status of the service. It will add iptables rules that DNAT the ingress traffic to the clusterIP of the service.

Yes, I think we can also use microshift to insert the iptables rules instead of using klipper.

### API Extensions

None

### Implementation Details

This new controller is part of the microshift binary. It shall be able to know

> what CNI is used by the cluster, and behave differently based on the CNI type.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if MicroShift may have this type of visibility into the which plugin, we certainly could, but we would be adding again coupling (microshift to CNI). See my above comments, I wonder if they make sense.

Do you have a link to the code on OVNk handling this plumbing?

Author: https://github.com/openshift/ovn-kubernetes/blob/master/docs/external-ip-and-loadbalancer-ingress.md

https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/blob/bbaa7d702103a912dcfe75d3b6292bfd18ecaf74/go-controller/pkg/node/gateway_shared_intf.go#L240

Author: It is hard to say. It depends on CNI datapath implementation. For those CNIs that don't either bypass the kernel or have their own implementation like OVN-K, I think we can do plumbing by adding iptables rules. I don't think there is a universal implementation that can work with any CNI.

Reviewer 3: K3s uses klipper-lb ([code](https://github.com/k3s-io/klipper-lb/blob/master/entry)) in form of DaemonSet for each service. Log for `8080`:
```
+ trap exit TERM INT
+ echo 0.0.0.0/0
+ grep -Eq :
+ iptables -t filter -I FORWARD -s 0.0.0.0/0 -p TCP --dport 8080 -j ACCEPT
+ echo 10.43.68.10
+ grep -Eq :
+ cat /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward
+ '[' 1 '==' 1 ]
+ iptables -t filter -A FORWARD -d 10.43.68.10/32 -p TCP --dport 8080 -j DROP
+ iptables -t nat -I PREROUTING '!' -s 10.43.68.10/32 -p TCP --dport 8080 -j DNAT --to 10.43.68.10:8080
+ iptables -t nat -I POSTROUTING -d 10.43.68.10/32 -p TCP -j MASQUERADE
+ '[' '!' -e /pause ]
+ mkfifo /pause
```
`10.43.68.10` is `clusterIP` so it's just forwarding ports from host to clusterIP. There's a chance that something similar should work for any CNI, right? Maybe later we can consider disabling ovn-k handling and have the same logic for every CNI.

Author: What if a CNI has already got LB service support similar to OVN-K. Do we also modify the CNI to turn it off? And for some CNI implementations, their datapath will bypass the kernel stack, or use hardware offload like DPU. How can we use iptables rules to do the job?

Reviewer 4: @pmtk , @pliurh , can we resolve this thread?

### Risks and Mitigations

The pluggable CNI design of Microshift is still under discussion, we need to
make sure that CNI type can be aware in Microshift binary.

### Drawbacks

It is not a CNI agnostic design. The loadbalancer Service controller will behave
differently between OVN-Kubernetes and other CNIs.

## Design Details

The Service of loadblancer type is designed to exposes the Service externally
using a cloud provider's load balancer. Normally, there is a loadbalancer
Service controller which is responsible for:

1. provision a loadbalancer for the Service.
2. publish the ingress endpoint information in the Service's
   `.status.loadBalancer` field.

> 

Reviewer: Does the load balancer controller need to handle service port mapping?

Author: No, the loadbalancer itself would do that.

However, in the context of Microshift, as we only get one node in the cluster,
it doesn't make sense to use a real load balancer to forward the ingress
traffic. So instead of provisioning the loadbalancer instance, the controller
is only responsible for helping the CNIs to plumbing the ingress traffic.

### Traffic Plumbing

#### OVN-Kubernetes

OVN-Kubernetes has already implemented the [loadbalancer ingress
IP](https://github.com/openshift/ovn-kubernetes/blob/master/docs/external-ip-and-loadbalancer-ingress.md)
support. The ovnkube-node component which is running on each host watches the
Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field, and insert iptables rules that does DNAT
to the clusterIP of the Service. Therefore, from the loadbalancer Service
controller perspective, it will only be responsible for the updating the status
of the Service. The ovn-kubernetes will do the rest of the job.

#### Other CNIs

For other CNIs, which don't have the similar function as OVN-Kubernetes, neither
do they bypass the kernel for the ingress traffic, we can take the similar
approach as K3S. The K3S's loadbalancer Service controller provisions a

> [klipper-lb](https://github.com/k3s-io/klipper-lb) pod to each nodes for each

Reviewer: why it needs to create a pod per service?

Reviewer: do we need a new image for this pod?

Author: The pod will reserve the port of the node. So if another service occupies the pod, the pod cannot be created. Thus the service status will not be updated.

>do we need a new image for this pod?

Maybe not. The pod only runs several iptables commands, so if we can find an existing image that has the iptables installed. We can just use it can put the script in the pod manifest.

loadbalancer Service. The pod can insert iptables rules which DNAT ingress
traffic to the nodeIP of the Service.

### Update Status
As, we don't want to ask user to allocated additional VIP as the loadbalancer
IP. We can say that the ingress ip of the Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field
shall always be the existing IPs of the node. When there are multiple IPs, the

> kubelet `NodeIP` shall be used by default.

Reviewer: Shall we talk about the cleanup and reconcilation of the iptable rules?

Reviewer: For example:
when node IP changes, the iptable rules shall be reconciled.
when firewall reload happens, the iptable rules shall be re-inserted.

Reviewer 2: The rules probably don't need to know anything about the specific host network IP.

Author: OVN-K will also put the IP in the iptables rules. Since for OVN-K, the IP can be anything value. It can be a VIP.

The controller shall also check if the Service port has already been allocated
to other loadbalancer Service before updating the Service status.

### Open Questions [optional]

* Do we want to allow users to choose the IP other than the NodeIP as the
Ingress IP of loadbalancer Service, when there are multiple IPs available?

### Test Plan

N/A

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

N/A

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

#### Failure Modes

If the port of one Service  has already been occupied by either a node process
or other loadbalancer Services, the controller shall leave the

> `.status.loadBalancer` of the Service blank, thus the Service will be put in

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to set it in error state?, I think it's better if we can explain the user that the port is busy somewhere in the system and that's why it's failing.

Author: In k8s cloud provider implementation, it will create an event when an error happens. I think we take the same approach.
https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider/blob/73b07b952335721870a60aebfc8936af19fe921b/controllers/service/controller.go#L327

  - "@copejon, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@fzdarsky, MicroShift architect"
  - "@ggiguash, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@dhellmann, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@oglok, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@zshi-redhat, MicroShift "
approvers:
  - "@dhellmann"
api-approvers:
  - None
creation-date: 2023-01-13
last-updated: 2023-01-13
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NP-604
---

# MicroShift Service of Loadbalancer Type Support

## Summary

Customers using loadbalancer type Service don't want to make changes to their
workloads/deployment for MicroShift as they use other k8s flavors as well. It is
also promised by us that users do not have to modify workload manifests that
work on OpenShift to run on MicroShift (as long as they do not use APIs
unsupported by MicroShift).

## Motivation

Normally, the loadbalancer type Service is supported by a Kubernetes cluster
with external load balancers. In Microshift, as there is only one node in the
cluster, we don't really need to have a load balancer. However, from user
experience perspective, it's important for customers to be able to migrate
the workload to Microshift without modification. So we need to find a way to

> support the loadbalancer type Service without a load balancer.

Author: I added this to the motivation section.

### API Extensions

None

### Implementation Details

This new controller is part of the microshift binary. It shall be able to know
what CNI is used by the cluster, and behave differently based on the CNI type.

### Risks and Mitigations

The pluggable CNI design of Microshift is still under discussion, we need to
make sure that CNI type can be aware in Microshift binary.

### Drawbacks

It is not a CNI agnostic design. The loadbalancer Service controller will behave
differently between OVN-Kubernetes and other CNIs.

## Design Details

The Service of loadblancer type is designed to exposes the Service externally
using a cloud provider's load balancer. Normally, there is a loadbalancer
Service controller which is responsible for:

1. provision a loadbalancer for the Service.
2. publish the ingress endpoint information in the Service's
   `.status.loadBalancer` field.

However, in the context of Microshift, as we only get one node in the cluster,
it doesn't make sense to use a real load balancer to forward the ingress
traffic. So instead of provisioning the loadbalancer instance, the controller
is only responsible for helping the CNIs to plumbing the ingress traffic.

> ### Traffic Plumbing

Reviewer 4: If we say that we do not want to bring klipper into the product, how would you approach the division in behavior described here? To me it seems like the load balancer implementation either needs to be able to be swapped out (making it another plugin type) or we need a configuration option to control the built-in implementation for cases where OVN-K is not being used. Is that right, or were you thinking of another approach?

Author: > If we say that we do not want to bring klipper into the product, how would you approach the division in behavior described here?

The implementation of klipper is quite lightweight. Its image only contains a simple script that configures iptables rules. We can implement the same logic in either microshift binary or hostnetwork pods(the k3s/klipper's approach). The advantage of using hostnetwork pods is that: 1) the pod will also reserve the host port. It takes advantage of the kubernetes scheduling so that it avoids the racing condition; 2) K3S supports multi-nodes, and the pod can be deployed with DaemonSets on each node and configure the node.

From MicroShift perspective, if we don't want to take the klipper approach. We can use microshift binary to control the host iptables rule for most of the non-OVN-K CNIs.

> To me it seems like the load balancer implementation either needs to be able to be swapped out (making it another plugin type) or we need a configuration option to control the built-in implementation for cases where OVN-K is not being used. Is that right, or were you thinking of another approach?

In my assumption, to support other CNIs, we'll have a field in the microshift configuration file to indicate which CNI will be set up for the cluster. The loadbalancer service controller can use this information to determine what it needs to do.

Author: Apart from klipper, kube-proxy is another option. Although, it consumes more resources. Some CNIs need to work with it to support the service anyway.

Reviewer 4: @pliurh , can you make sure both of those alternatives are listed at the bottom of the doc? Then we can resolve this thread.

Author: Yes, I did.

controller perspective, it will only be responsible for the updating the status
of the Service. The ovn-kubernetes will do the rest of the job.

#### Other CNIs

For other CNIs, which don't have the similar function as OVN-Kubernetes, neither
do they bypass the kernel for the ingress traffic, we can take the similar
approach as K3S. The K3S's loadbalancer Service controller provisions a
[klipper-lb](https://github.com/k3s-io/klipper-lb) pod to each nodes for each
loadbalancer Service. The pod can insert iptables rules which DNAT ingress
traffic to the nodeIP of the Service.

Another option is manipulating the iptables rule by this controller itself.
Since there is only one node, and the microshsift binary has the access to the
host network.

### Update Status
As, we don't want to ask user to allocated additional VIP as the loadbalancer
IP. We can say that the ingress ip of the Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field
shall always be the existing IPs of the node. When there are multiple IPs, the
kubelet `NodeIP` shall be used by default.

The controller shall also check if the Service port has already been allocated

> to other loadbalancer Service before updating the Service status.

Reviewer 4: How does it do that check safely? Is there any risk of a race condition if 2 services are created at the same time?

Author: I don't think there is a race condition. Assume we implement the controller with a work queue and one worker. All the service update/creation requests will be handled in sequence.

Reviewer 4: Using a work queue and limiting to one worker is a good design detail to include in the document. Could you add a sentence here about that?

### Open Questions [optional]

* Do we want to allow users to choose the IP other than the NodeIP as the

> Ingress IP of loadbalancer Service, when there are multiple IPs available?

Reviewer 4: Is that a feature supported in OCP?

Author: That is a feature of OVN-K. OVN-K doesn't care if the IP is used as the LB service. It will just use whatever IP which is set in the `.status.loadBalancer`.

Reviewer 4: This isn't my area of expertise, so I'm not sure what reasons a user would have for picking an IP other than the node IP. Do we have that requirement? Does saying no, that we only want to support the node IP, make it harder to change our mind about that later?

Author: This is similar to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NP-621.

Reviewer 4: I asked about OCP support because we want to think carefully about supporting something in MicroShift that is not exposed in OCP.

Do we need to answer this question to move ahead? Or can we leave this as an open question for now and wait for an RFE to help us shape requirements for setting the IP?

Author: As for now, OCP doesn't have this feature, as we would rely on a real loadbalancer like metal-lb to expose VIPs instead of the IPs of nodes. I think we can keep this as an open question for now.

NodeIP as the ingress IP of the loadbalancer Service. 

### Goals

* Allow users to deploy the load balancer type Service to MicroShift.
* The node IP shall be used as the ingress IP of the Service.
* As we will support pluggable CNI in MicroShift. The implementation shall be
also compatible with CNIs other than OVN-Kubernetes.

### Non-Goals

* 

## Proposal

To support the loadbalancer type Service, we need to create a new controller
component that watch the Service objects. It shall be responsible for:

1. work with CNIs to plumb the ingress traffic to the endpoint pods.
2. publish the ingress endpoint information in the Service's
   `.status.loadBalancer` field.

### Workflow Description

**cluster user** is a human user responsible for provisioning Services to a
MicroShift cluster.

1. The cluster user deploys a Service of type: LoadBalancer 
2. The loadbalancer service controller watches the creation of the service. It
will update the Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field, and help the CNIs to 
plumbing the ingress traffic to the endpoint pods.

### API Extensions

None

### Implementation Details

> This new controller is part of the microshift binary. It shall be able to know
> what CNI is used by the cluster, and behave differently based on the CNI type.

Reviewer 4: Rather than saying the implementation will have to work with any CNI, let's focus on the CNI we have today and consider expanding to any other implementations to be work to do in the future. When we know we need a different implementation, we could make it so this controller can be disabled and replaced with another one running in a pod, for example, since that would provide complete flexibility.

```suggestion
This new controller is part of the microshift binary. It shall be be limited to the OVN-K
CNI implementation, for now. Updating it to support other CNI implementations will
be left to a future enhancement.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

The pluggable CNI design of MicroShift is still under discussion, we need to
make sure that CNI type can be aware in MicroShift binary.

### Drawbacks

It is not a CNI agnostic design. The loadbalancer Service controller will behave
differently between OVN-Kubernetes and other CNIs.

## Design Details

The Service of loadblancer type is designed to exposes the Service externally
using a cloud provider's load balancer. Normally, there is a loadbalancer
Service controller which is responsible for:

1. provision a loadbalancer for the Service.
2. publish the ingress endpoint information in the Service's
   `.status.loadBalancer` field.

However, in the context of MicroShift, as we only get one node in the cluster,
it doesn't make sense to use a real load balancer to forward the ingress
traffic. So instead of provisioning the loadbalancer instance, the controller
is only responsible for helping the CNIs to plumbing the ingress traffic.

### Traffic Plumbing

Since different CNIs get different implementation on how to support Kubernetes
Services. We need to do the traffic plumbing differently for different CNI. The

> controller shall be aware of the CNI type from the configuration and behave
> accordingly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
first version of the controller shall _not_ be aware of the CNI type from the configuration.
Enhancing it to support other CNI implementations is deferred to a future release.
```

#### OVN-Kubernetes

OVN-Kubernetes has already implemented the [loadbalancer ingress
IP](https://github.com/openshift/ovn-kubernetes/blob/master/docs/external-ip-and-loadbalancer-ingress.md)
support. The ovnkube-node component which is running on each host watches the
Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field, and insert iptables rules that does DNAT
to the clusterIP of the Service. Therefore, from the loadbalancer Service
controller perspective, it will only be responsible for the updating the status
of the Service. The ovn-kubernetes will do the rest of the job.

> #### Other CNIs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Notes for Future Work to Support Other CNIs
```

For other CNIs, which don't have the similar function as OVN-Kubernetes, neither
do they bypass the kernel for the ingress traffic, we can take the similar
approach as K3S. The K3S's loadbalancer Service controller provisions a
[klipper-lb](https://github.com/k3s-io/klipper-lb) pod to each nodes for each
loadbalancer Service. The pod can insert iptables rules which DNAT ingress
traffic to the nodeIP of the Service.

Another option is manipulating the iptables rule by this controller itself.

> Since there is only one node, and the microshsift binary has the access to the

Reviewer 3: We don't plan multi-node right now but we don't want to close that path.
In case of multi-node this would be more difficult to maintain, right? Synchronize them across nodes (maybe with a CRD), but still - klipper-lb's approach seems easier

Reviewer 3: Do you know how `kube-proxy` compares to `klipper-lb` resource wise? You wrote in other comment that `kube-proxy` is heavier, but how much? MicroShift is intended for edge deployments so I guess every MB of memory is worth gold

Author: As klipper-lb just runs once and then sleeps. Resource consumption can be seen as near zero. kube-proxy consumes ~30MB of memory in my kind cluster. However, we shall also keep in mind that some CNI doesn't support normal k8s service without kube-proxy. We'll have to run kube-proxy for those CNIs.

Reviewer 4: I don't think we need to resolve this question immediately. We have several options, and we can consider them when we fully understand the requirements based on which other CNI implementations are are asked to support. I've retitled this section to indicate that it refers to future work.

host network.

For those CNIs that relays on kube-proxy to support the kubernetes Service. We
can also consider to use kube-proxy to do the job.

### Update Status
As, we don't want to ask user to allocated additional VIP as the loadbalancer
IP. We can say that the ingress ip of the Service's `.status.loadBalancer` field
shall always be the existing IPs of the node. When there are multiple IPs, the
kubelet `NodeIP` shall be used by default.

The controller shall also check if the Service port has already been allocated
to other loadbalancer Service before updating the Service status.

### Open Questions [optional]

* Do we want to allow users to choose the IP other than the NodeIP as the
Ingress IP of loadbalancer Service, when there are multiple IPs available?

> 

Reviewer 2: I would add an open question:

* How do we make this implementation compatible with the usage of metal-lb ?

Reviewer 4: Do we need metal-lb if we have a load balancer built in?

Author: The function we're trying to implement is not the same as metal-lb. Metal-lb uses a VIP as the Ingress IP of loadbalancer Service, and advises it with BGP or ARP. So I am unsure if any customer wants to use metal-lb with microshift. So, maybe we can give a flag that users can disable the local loadbalancer controller. Users can choose if they want to use it or not.

Reviewer 4: Something simple like being able to turn it off makes sense. Let's keep this simple for now, though, and not commit to doing that in the first version. When we have a definite requirement to support metal-lb, we can evaluate the best way to do it.
